what helps make our lipgloss shiny and
colorful our face cream soft and our
foundation smooth
in many cases its palm oil it's in 70%
of beauty products some people say it
should be banned but why it's just like
mountains literally everywhere huh my
name is MA I'm 28 and I'm a makeup
artist and I'm going to the other side
of the world to see where palm oil comes
from people don't want you to know the
real story and that's very obvious
nobody sees this we don't appreciate
kind of what goes into putting things on
our face or what we use to like wash
with and this side of it should be shown
more it's tearing down the world's
rainforests and destroying people's
homes there's no hope for future for
them that's it for him in his family I
want to know if there's a better way to
make my makeup
[Music]
I grew up here in frame I went to school
and college and now I run my own beauty
salon I just fell over sorry I use quite
a wide range of brands I'm going to be
using some liquid foundations a lot of
highlighters we're going to be kind of
looking at more of a radiant look I
remember being young and looking at my
mom in the mirror watching her do her
makeup I'm just copying you know
it's amazing what would we do without it
really if you've got a spot cover it up
I'm just prenuptial live so I don't know
what I'd do without mascara if I was in
the desert island that's one thing I'll
take because I'd look like a mole makeup
is a massive part of my life it can
transform you it can make you feel good
about yourself and it's creative I've
really noticed more and more of my
clients asking if the products I use are
cruelty free and what they're made of
I've tried to ethically source good
brand for our salon that is cruelty free
and vegan is becoming so much more asked
about yeah may seen things like
lipsticks and more oilier products safe
foundations probably mostly there's a
human in my forest and I don't know what
to do last year
palm oil made the headlines after this
Iceland advert was banned from being
shown on TV the supermarket decided to
stop using palm oil in all its own label
products it's and foods like peanut
butter biscuits and instant noodles and
what interests me the most is that it's
also in 70% of cosmetics
so should I give up all my makeup or is
there a better way it's quite hard
because there's quite a few things that
I'd like to take and obviously it's hard
to know if there's palm oil actually in
them and I did a bit of research about
that and it's really hard to find out if
it's in it because it's hidden under so
many different names so it just makes it
so hard to be able to know if it's
definitely in it or not we approach
loads of cosmetics companies to be in
this film only one agreed to take part
but if it's done in the right way is
definitely the the best solution but
under the condition that it is done in a
sustainable and responsible way
palm oil if it's done in the right way
is definitely the the best solution it
was a huge surprise for me to hear that
I'm heading out to Papua New Guinea to
find out where palm oil comes from sizes
how we can make it more sustainably I've
never flown further than Europe before
so this is a huge adventure for me just
so many new
a huge area
and here's the thing palm is actually
the most productive oil around for the
same amount of sunflower or coconut oil
which are the main alternatives you need
up to 10 times more lands than for palm
so why does palm oil have such a bad
reputation
despite being say productive the main
reason is deforestation it's said to
have been responsible for the loss of 8%
of the world's forests between 1990 and
Papua New Guinea is home to the third
largest rainforest in the world after
the Amazon and the Congo Basin this is
one of the largest palm oil plantations
in the country to make way for it the
forest has been cut down huge chunks a
time nobody sees this we don't
appreciate kind of what goes into
putting things on our face love me I
love what we use to like wash with and
this side of it should be shown more
just feel sad just feel upset just feel
sorry
[Music]
you know the wildlife the people it's
all changing a long hot bumpy drive into
this massive plantation and I started to
hear from people saying their lives had
suffered because of palm oil these
people signed an agreement with a big
oil company in return for lease in their
land they have promised a lump sum of
cash improved homes and a better school
this village elder told me they haven't
received the full money they are owed
and the housing and school haven't
materialized the wani oil palm
plantations told us it had paid the
right money to various landowner
companies but it was up to them how they
distribute the monies
the company also said it had invested in
housing and schools in the area around
the plantation
I saw constant reminders of what we're
doing to the forest in other areas we
filmed children were working barefoot on
the plantations there is no rules for
jor-el or Nadine Delta to a printer and
yet to work in the pan for they will
have money we also met others some who
were clearly very sick
the juanny oil palm isn't a certified
sustainable plantation it told us it
acted legally and did not allow child
labour
it said the area had been neglected for
decades but it had bought jobs and
benefits and was committed to addressing
all the needs of the villagers we used
to live by forest the forest was our
source of food it was just like our
supermarket but not the communicate we
lost them
I mean like you can hear the difference
from the rainforest behind us from the
wildlife but here there's just no sound
so upsetting looks empty
huge areas of Papua New Guinea's
rainforest have been cut down to make
way for palm oil plantations but it
doesn't have to be this way what we
decided and I think also the NGOs and
everybody agrees on that today
palm oil if it is done in a sustainable
way is a very good vegetal oil the
alternative is not to say no palm oil no
the alternative is to challenge the
whole supply chain to do palm oil in a
sustainable way in an irresponsible way
there are a number of companies doing
this
they're producing sustainable palm oil
which means agreeing not to cut down any
more forests and treating their workers
fairly I flew to a different part of
Papua New Guinea to see how one company
does it go on a trip to a palm oil
plantation so that we can see the
workers basically starting their work
and excited to see foundation some
eyeliner yeah I just got to the vans
every day the workers gather at first
light
Heavenly Father with praise and me thank
you for this new day bless all those
helping us through Christ our Lord amen
so hard
this is all to bring us a product yeah
yeah yeah literally people have no idea
how where it comes from how it starts
the forest here was destroyed over 50
years ago but this palm oil company has
said that they won't cut down any more
these guys are the fruit cutters it's a
skilled job and incredibly hard work
they use a 14 meter long extendable
metal pole with a size at the end to
harvest the palm every time one of these
bunches landed I could feel the ground
shake each bunch weighs around 25
kilograms and has hundreds of individual
fruits the bits that fall off are picked
up by women known as loose fruit marries
the orange flesh becomes crude palm oil
which is used in cooking but the white
center is the bit I'm interested in palm
kernel oil is the one that is used in
cosmetics more and it's more expensive
to harvest because there's not a lot of
it compared to palm oil so it feels a
bit like like a vitamin any kind of oil
so cool it's just crazy that this one
little fruit producers so much brave
early along with promising not to cut
down any more trees sustainable palm oil
companies also have to treat their
workers fairly on this plantation they
are given safety equipment breakfast and
transport I feel happy because the
company provides water yeah and like
transport for the children to go to
school I feel one of the most important
things is that with palm you get the
most oil from the leased land so growing
the alternative like sunflower or
coconuts here instead of these palms
would mean this plantation would have to
be up to ten times bigger to produce the
same amount of oil this is the mill
where the fruit is turned into oil daily
and her I hate flies I wouldn't survive
in the jungle sure the center of the
fruit becomes palm kernel oil on a busy
day they produce six thousand tonnes of
oil here it's then pumped into tankers
and shipped all the way to Liverpool to
be processed
and on to the rest of the world to go
into food and beauty products
demand for palm oil is growing from
cosmetic companies but how do you get
more oil without cutting down more trees
the answer is science in a lab in the
heart of the plantation I got to see
these modified seedlings they're being
crossbred and could eventually produce
up to 10 times as much fruit on the same
amount of land seeing the stay as
definitely made me feel like the palm
industry isn't as dark as what it's made
out to us
all these have to be hand planted we
were because you need to make sure
you've got the pyramidal facing the
right way out few mil it's it's the
emerging leaf and if you plant it upside
down it's not real good but it's easy
done and then 12 weeks this week size 11
1 seed moment so one more week in a
nursery and then these young trees are
then planted where old palms used to be
thank you for seeing us around I think a
lot of questions that my clientele would
have is how would they find out if palm
oil is actually in their in their
products and how would we go about
knowing if it's come from a sustainable
company so that's one of the major
problems for us is that we go to a lot
of time trouble you know our ethos if
you like the very way that we work is to
be sustainable and we get no recognition
unlike for instance some of the coffee
companies that are rainforest alliance
accredited or some of the tea producers
and they can stick the the badge on and
everybody has comfort that that's come
from a sustainable source with our
industry that doesn't happen yeah and
and that that disconnects very a very
big problem
for me as a consumer it is very
difficult to know which products
actually contain sustainable palm oil
there is a logo from the roundtable on
sustainable palm oil RSPO for shorts but
it rarely makes it onto our cosmetics
labels so how will we know
local people have lived in and relied on
the rainforest for thousands of years I
came to do a bit of exploring
so beautiful lots of wet ground and lot
of wood room because you know shade food
this is Nick's land it's about as far
away from Somerset as you can get yeah
this spider was bigger than my hands
massive spider have you ever seen they
give you play if it jumped it's
incredible it's beautiful
words can't describe this place so full
of noises and beauty it was really quite
overwhelming
what really moved me was how deep the
connection to the forest is Nick and his
family can grow lots of fruit and vege
on their land and sell what they don't
eat but it's not enough to survive he
told me that he had to cut down a large
part of his sacred forest to plant palm
to say that he could support his family
and it's a big family he's got eight
kids and a bunch of grandchildren did we
discover the new blood Rouge as they
called it
cutting down the trees has been the
hardest thing in the world for him it's
very beautiful
yeah I can see why you want to protect
it I do destroy the forest and the trees
and I see the birds flying around crying
around but I'm sorry for it we need
crowns and medicines all this so I
destroyed my forest to plant that
because the demonic force all right
we've just seen like so much corporate
stuff so it's just um we don't see this
side of it you know we don't show you
that side of it so this Phil upset too
yes thank you
it was so interesting to hear that this
family didn't know anything about what
palm oil goes into I thought I'd show
them in the UK we call this lip gloss
and this makes your lips shiny what do
you think about that about seeing this
but it felt strange because they don't
need makeup here before I came out here
I never knew the whole story behind palm
oil now I have seen the real impact of
it and it's definitely had an effect on
me we take a lot for granted I think
this trip has made me feel very
differently about kind of how I how I
see what we're using the world how it
works and if I can try and make a change
to what I'm doing and hopefully others
will follow we asked some of the biggest
and most popular cosmetics brands about
the use of palm oil L'Oreal The Body
Shop and Barry M say a hundred percent
of the palm oil they use is sustainable
and Coty the company that owns Rimmel
say 20 percent of the palm oil they use
is sustainable and they say they want to
make that 100 percent by 2022 Chanel
Estee Lauder and lush didn't respond so
what can we do as consumers some
environmental groups like Greenpeace and
the WWF say boycotting palm isn't the
way to go
because so many people's incomes rely on
it and the alternatives could be worse
but we can start checking the
ingredients in what we use and look out
for products that contain sustainable
palm oil if done sustainably it's
helping the environment and it's also
helping the people that work for the
company to live a better life
and if your favorite brand doesn't use
sustainable palm oil you could put
pressure on them by asking them why not
palm oil isn't going away anytime soon
so it's up to us to decide what we do
about it
since the palm oil trip and learning
about kind of what goes on behind the
scenes I think that's made me more
conscious to actually look at what I'm
using but also yeah for the salon as
well that's that's really important I
would never have done that before this
time last year I was just maybe looking
into cruelty-free vegan and now it's
like I'm trying to make sure that I'm
looking into what I'm actually using
it's so difficult I'm still finding it
difficult to actually find out if it's
in my products so I've written to the
company which I use skin care for in the
salon so I'm still waiting to hear back
I haven't heard back it's been obviously
like nearly a month yes it's quite like
a big deal to go right to the company
but I think it's really important like
once you start doing that then other
people will start doing it so I hope
that's what will happen if you can't
find out if it is sustainable then shout
about it do something about it